# Consulting agreement

This is a Consulting Agreement (“Agreement”) for professional services.


## 1. Introduction


### 1.1. Parties

This Agreement is made by and between:

  * Person's name:

  * Person's title/role/position:

  * Organization's name:

  * Organization's postal address:

hereafter referred to as "CLIENT" 

and:

  * Person's name:

  * Person's title/role/position:

  * Organization's name:

  * Organization's postal address:

hereafter referred to as "PROVIDER".

Hereafter referred to as a "Party" individually.

Hereafter referred to as the "Parties" collectively.


### 1.2. Date

This agreement is dated and in effect as of:

  * Date:


### 1.3. Purpose

This agreement is with respect to consulting professional services for CLIENT's
business, hereinafter referred to as the "Work".

Whereas, PROVIDER is a business consultant technology developer;

Whereas, CLIENT wishes PROVIDER to create certain Work described more fully
herein; 

Whereas, PROVIDER wishes to create such Work;

Now, therefore, in consideration of the foregoing premises and the mutual
covenants hereinafter set forth and other valuable considerations, the parties
hereto agree as follows.


### 1.4. Place

This Agreement shall be governed by and construed in accordance with the laws
of:

  * State/Province:

  * Country/Nation:

The validity, construction and performance of this Agreement shall be governed
and construed in accordance with the laws applicable to contracts made and to be
wholly performed within such place, without giving effect to any conflict of
laws provisions thereof.

The country courts and state courts located in the place shall have sole and
exclusive jurisdiction over any disputes arising under the terms of this
Agreement.

This agreement includes the right of forum non conveniens. 

Note: Forum non conveniens is a mostly common law legal doctrine through which a
court acknowledges that another forum or court where the case might have been
brought is a more appropriate venue for a legal case, and transfers the case to
such a forum. -- Wikipedia.

Reference: https://wikipedia.org/wiki/Forum_non_conveniens


### 1.5 Priority

If there is any ambiguity, inconsistency or conflict between the terms and
conditions contained in any of the documents forming a part of this Agreement,
then the Agreement shall be construed in the following order of priority, i.e. 1
takes precedence over 2 and so on:

1. These terms and conditions.

2. The provisions of any Work Order.

3. The provisions of any schedules.

4. Any other documents incorporated or referenced herein.


### 1.6. Work Order

All work performed by PROVIDER shall be documented in a Work Order ("WO") signed
by authorized representatives of both parties. 

Each Work Order shall set forth, at a minimum, the details set forth on
Attachment 1. 

PROVIDER shall have the right to accept or decline any proposed Work Order. 

All instructions, approvals, submissions, notices and any other communications
or transactions that must be made to CLIENT shall be made through the
representative set forth on the Work Order. 

Except, as expressly set forth in the Work Order or in this Agreement, PROVIDER
shall furnish all labor, materials, equipment, supervision and insurance need to
perform the work.


### 1.7. References

Areas marked "Reference:", "Note:", or "Example:", used in this Agreement are
for reference only and shall not be used or relied upon in the interpretation of
this Agreement.

Headings used in this Agreement are for reference only and shall not be used or
relied upon in the interpretation of this Agreement.
s


## 2. Definitions


### 2.1. Technology

Technology shall mean designs, methods, processes, formulas,
algorithms, discoveries, inventions, technical information, drawings,
modifications, enhancements, improvements, and other technologies.


### 2.2. Background Technology

Background Technology shall mean all Technology that: (i) was
developed, conceived or owned by a Party prior to the Effective Date;
or (ii) is conceived or reduced to practice by a Party outside its
performance under this Agreement.


### 2.3. Independent Technology

Independent Technology shall mean all Technology that: (i) is developed,
conceived or reduced to practice by PROVIDER, at any time, including
during this Agreement, and (ii) where the technology is generic enough
that it may be useful for unrelated projects, practices, or purposes.

Independent Technology may be used during the course of the Work, and also 
may be among the deliverables.

Example: Independent Technologies include technologies such as 
open source code, or public packages, or demonstrations, or tutorials.  

Example: PROVIDER may (i) write a text parser that is generic and 
generally useful; or (ii) a testing tool that is suitable for becoming a 
shared library usable by multiple projects, or (iii) a data calculation 
application that can be published as open source code, or (iv) a system 
utility that can become a public package, or (v) a demonstration of how 
to use or implement an idea, or (vi) a tutorial that teaches a process.


## 3. Documents


### 3.1. Consulting Agreement

This document.


### 3.2. Work Order

A separate Work Order ("WO") may describe the Work, such as any plans,
deliverables, milestones, specifications, work breakdown structures, etc.


### 3.3. Fees and Payments Agreement

A separate Fees And Payments Agreement ("FPA") may describe any fees and
payments, such as any estimates, retainers, rates, compensation, etc.


### 3.4. Confidentiality Agreement

A separate Confidentiality Agreement ("CA") may describe any confidentiality
areas, such as for trade secrets, private security, non-public documents, etc.

Note: In general, a confidentiality agreement may be also known as a
non-disclosure agreement (NDA), confidential disclosure agreement (CDA),
proprietary information agreement (PIA) or secrecy agreement (SA).


### 3.5. Non-Compete Agreement

The Parties have no non-compete agreement ("NCA").

Note: California law voids non-compete agreements for consulting and
professional services. This comes from California Business and Professions Code
Section 16600 which provides: "every contract by which anyone is restrained from
engaging in a lawful profession, trade, or business of any kind is to that
extent void." California law doesn't allow non-compete agreements for employees,
consultants, or contractors. The enumerated exceptions are for sale of a
business, partnership dissolution, and disassociation of a partner.


## 4. Content


### 4.1 Independence

The CLIENT and PROVIDER are independent parties. 

There is no dependency such as employer, principal or partner of, or joint
venture.


### 4.2 Authority

The CLIENT and PROVIDER have no authority to make any promise, guarantee,
warranty, or representation, or to assume, create, or incur any liability or
other obligation of any kind, either express or implied, against or in the name
of, or on behalf of, the other.

Note: For example suppose a vendor wants a legal confidentiality agreement, and
wants it to include the CLIENT and PROVIDER. Each party must sign; one party
cannot sign for the other party.


### 4.3 Access

CLIENT authorizes PROVIDER to access the Work's related aspects, such as any
content, technology, etc.


### 4.4 Assignments

Unless otherwise specified in a Work Order, PROVIDER reserves the right to
assign subcontractors to the Work to ensure quality and on-time completion.


### 4.5 Non-provider changes

PROVIDER is not responsible for any changes made by anyone other than consultant
or consultant's authorized agent(s).

Example of authorized agents: CLIENT and PROVIDER may want to work with a
third-party who is fully qualified, such as an expert or vendor. The Parties may
mutually agree to authorize that third-party to make changes such that the
PROVIDER continues to be responsible for the changes. An area where this kind of
effect can come up in practice is with high performance systems such as
high-security servers or high-optimization databases, when CLIENT and PROVIDER
want to get help from an expert or vendor, and want the resulting changes to
become part of the Work.


### 4.6 Reservation of rights

All rights not expressly granted hereunder are reserved to PROVIDER.

This includes and is not limited to all rights in sketches, comps, demos,
prototypes, other preliminary materials, etc.

Moral rights, as described in the international Berne Convention for the
Protection of Literary and Artistic Works, are reserved to PROVIDER.


### 4.7 Permissions and releases

CLIENT agrees to indemnify and hold harmless PROVIDER against any and all
claims, costs, and expenses, including attorney's fees, due to materials
included in the Work at the request of CLIENT for which no copyright permission
or previous release was requested or uses which exceed the uses allowed pursuant
to a permission or release.


### 4.8 Referenceability

CLIENT agrees to be generally available as a reference for PROVIDER, and that
PROVIDER may display non-confidential results of Work in PROVIDER's portfolio.


### 4.9 Copyright and license for the Work

Copyright for the Work is in PROVIDER's name unless otherwise specified.

License for the Work is in PROVIDER's name unless otherwise specified.

Upon completion of Work, and only upon receiving payment of balance due,
PROVIDER will sign a Release of Copyright that releases the copyright to CLIENT.

Upon completion of Work, and only upon receiving payment of balance due,and
PROVIDER will grant CLIENT a perpetual, irrovocable, worldwide license to use
and modify the Work. 

Unless otherwise specified, this license does not include the right to
redistribute, resell, or relicense the Work, or the Background Technology, or
the Independent Technology.


### 4.10 Copyright and license for Technology

While performing the Work, PROVIDER may from time to time work with Background
Technologies and/or Independent Technologies.

Example: PROVIDER may use or create open source software, demonstrations and/or
tutorials, stock photos and/or stock media, freely-available graphic diagrams,
published template documents, pre-packaged applications, commercial off the
shelf software, etc.

PROVIDER may from time to time modify these works, or create derivative works. 

Example: PROVIDER may modify open source code, edit stock photos, augment
graphic diagrams, fill in template documents, extend pre-packaged applications,
create plugins for commercial off the shelf software, create demonstrations or
tutorials, etc.

These modifications and/or derivative works may be used during the course of the
Work and may be among the deliverables.

Copyright for Background Technology remains the property of respective owners.

Copyright for Independent Technology is the property of PROVIDER.

License for Background Technology remains the property of respective owners. 

License for Independent Technology is the property of PROVIDER.

Note: Background Technology and Independent Technology may include many kinds of
copyrights and licenses. 

Example: open source software toolkits may include the GNU Public License (GPL),
graphic diagrams may include the Creative Commons (CC) icense, template
documents may include the Apache License, etc. 

In all cases it is CLIENT's responsibility to vet any and all legal aspects, to
CLIENT's satisfaction. In all cases it is not PROVIDER's responsibility to vet
legal aspects.

Unless otherwise specified, PROVIDER's modifications of Background Technology,
and/or derivatives of Background Technology, belong to the Background Technology
respective owners. 

Example: PROVIDER may develop a software bug fix for Background Technology
source code, in which case the bug fix belongs to the Background Technology
respective owner, not the CLIENT.


## 5. Resolution


### 5.1. Agreement to resolve claims

We use the American Arbitration Association (AAA) standard procedures for
mediation and non-binding arbitration.


### 5.2. Mediation

If any controversy or claim arises out of or relating to this contract, or the
breach thereof, and cannot be settled through negotiation, then the parties
agree to try in good faith to settle the dispute by mediation administered by
the American Arbitration Association under its mediation procedures before
resorting to arbitration, litigation or some other dispute resolution procedure.


### 5.3. Non-Binding Arbitration

If any controversy or claim arises out of or relating to this contract, or the
breach thereof, which cannot be settled by mediation as described above, then
the parties agree to submit to non-binding arbitration administered by the
American Arbitration Association under its Non-Binding Arbitration Rules before
the parties may initiate binding arbitration, litigation, or some other type of
dispute resolution process.


### 5.4. Recovery

In the event of litigation relating to this Agreement, the prevailing party
shall be entitled to recover its reasonable attorney’s fees and expenses.


### 5.5. Integrity

If any provision of this Agreement, or restriction of this Agreement, is found
by a court of competent jurisdiction to be unlawful, or unenforceable, or void,
such provision will be modified, rewritten or interpreted to include as much of
its nature and scope as will render it enforceable. If it cannot be so modified,
rewritten or interpreted to be enforceable in any respect, it will not be given
effect, and the remainder of the Agreement will be enforced as if such provision
was not included.

Any failure by either party to enforce the other party’s strict performance of
any provision of this Agreement will not constitute a waiver of its right to
subsequently enforce such provision or any other provision of this Agreement.


## 6. Limits


### 6.1. Sole agreement

This Agreement constitutes the entire understanding between the parties and
supersedes any and all prior or contemporaneous understandings and agreements,
whether oral or written, between the parties, with respect to the subject matter
hereof. 


### 6.2. Modification

This Agreement can only be modified by a written amendment signed by the party
against whom enforcement of such modification is sought.


### 6.3. Change order

Any agreements not specified in this contract must be mutually authorized by a
written change order.


### 6.4. Warranties and guarantees

There are no warranties or guarantees, either express or implied.

NO WARRANTIES ARE MADE BY EITHER PARTY UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WHATSOEVER.

NO GUARANTEES ARE MADE BY EITHER PARTY UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WHATSOEVER.


### 6.5. Communications

Any notices or communications required or permitted to be given hereunder may be
delivered by hand, deposited with a nationally recognized overnight carrier,
electronic-mail, or mailed by certified mail, return receipt requested, postage
prepaid, in each case, to the address of the other party first indicated above
(or such other addressee as may be furnished by a party in accordance with this
paragraph). All such notices or communications shall be deemed to have been
given and received (a) in the case of personal delivery or electronic-mail, on
the date of such delivery, (b) in the case of delivery by a nationally
recognized overnight carrier, on the third business day following dispatch and
(c) in the case of mailing, on the seventh business day following such mailing.


### 6.6. Transfer

This Agreement is personal in nature, and neither party may directly or
indirectly assign or transfer it by operation of law or otherwise without the
prior written consent of the other party, whose consent will not be unreasonably
withheld. All obligations contained in this Agreement shall extend to and be
binding upon the parties to this Agreement and their respective successors,
assigns and designees.


### 6.6. Termination

Either party may terminate this Agreement by giving 30 days written notice to
the other of such termination. In the event that Work is postponed or terminated
at the request of CLIENT, PROVIDER shall have the right to bill pro rata for
work completed through the date of that request, while reserving all rights
under this Agreement.

If additional payment is due, this shall be payable within 10 days of CLIENT's
written notification to stop work. In the event of termination, CLIENT shall
also pay any expenses incurred by PROVIDER and PROVIDER shall own all rights to
the Work. CLIENT shall assume responsibility for all collection of legal fees
necessitated by delay and/or default in payment.


### 6.7. Limitation of liability

PROVIDER's total aggregate liability for damages under this agreement shall be
limited to one hundred percent (100%) of the amount of fees received for
services by consultant under this agreement.

In the case of per project pricing, PROVIDER's total aggregate liability for
damages under this agreement shall be limited to one hundred percent (100%) of
the amount of fees received for services by consultant under this agreement for
the project at issue.


### 6.7. Laws affecting electronic commerce

From time to time governments enact laws and levy taxes and tariffs affecting
Internet electronic commerce. CLIENT agrees that CLIENT is solely responsible
for complying with such laws, taxes, and tariffs, and will hold harmless,
protect, and defend consultant and its subcontractors from any claim, suit,
penalty, tax, or tariff arising from CLIENT's exercise of Internet electronic
commerce.


### 6.8. Consequential damages

IN NO EVENT SHALL PROVIDER, ITS PARENT CORPORATION, OR THEIR AFFILIATES, AGENTS,
OR EMPLOYEES BE LIABLE FOR ANY INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, CONSEQUENTIAL, SPECIAL,
EXEMPLARY OR PUNITIVE LOSS OR DAMAGE, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, LOST
PROFITS, BUSINESS INTERRUPTION LOSSES, OR CUSTOMER CLAIMS, WHETHER ARISING UNDER
CONTRACT, WARRANTY, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, TORT, INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE, OR STRICT
LIABILITY, ARISING AT ANY TIME FROM ANY CAUSE WHATSOEVER IN CONNECTION WITH THIS
AGREEMENT OR PERFORMANCE HEREUNDER, EVEN IF CAUSED BY THE SOLE OR CONCURRENT OR
ACTIVE OR PASSIVE NEGLIGENCE, STRICT LIABILITY OR OTHER LEGAL FAULT OF
PROVIDER.


### 6.9. Indemnification

CLIENT DOES RELEASE, INDEMNIFY, AND HOLD HARMLESS PROVIDER, ITS PARENT
CORPORATION AND THEIR AFFILIATES, AGENTS, AND EMPLOYEES FROM AND AGAINST ANY AND
ALL LIABILITIES, CLAIMS, LOSSES, DAMAGES, COSTS, FEES AND EXPENSES, AS WELL AS
COSTS OF DEFENSE, SETTLEMENT, AND REASONABLE ATTORNEY'S FEES, ARISING AT ANY
TIME IN CONNECTION WITH i) CLAIMS BY CLIENT THAT EXCEED THE LIMITATION OF
LIABILITY SET OUT IN SECTION 10 ABOVE, AND ii) ANY CLAIMS BY THIRD PARTIES
ARISING IN CONNECTION WITH ANY WORK PRODUCT OR SERVICES PROVIDED HEREUNDER, EVEN
IF CAUSED BY THE SOLE OR CONCURRENT OR ACTIVE OR PASSIVE NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY OR OTHER LEGAL FAULT OF PROVIDER. THIS PARAGRAPH SHALL SURVIVE
EXPIRATION OR TERMINATION OF THIS AGREEMENT.


## 7. Signatures

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the Parties hereto have executed this Agreement as of the
date first above written.

On behalf of CLIENT:

  * Sign name:

  * Print name:

  * Date:

On behalf of PROVIDER:

  * Sign name:

  * Print name:

  * Date:
